Title: HarvestPoint-ACT: Explicit Target Selection and Harvest-Point Conditioning for Robotic Fruit Harvesting under Occlusion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18446v1

Published Time: Thu, 20 Aug 2026 00:25:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# HarvestPoint-ACT: Explicit Target Selection and Harvest-Point Conditioning for Robotic Fruit Harvesting under Occlusion 

Hanying Hu 1,∗, Weipeng Li 1,∗, Yikun Huang 1, Hao Chen 1,†, Zhengtao Hu 2, Changcai Yang 1, and Weiwei Wan 3

Abstract — End-to-end imitation learning avoids hand-made robot motion for approaching and grasping, but the policy must still decide which fruit to pick and where to close the gripper. Occlusion can make the policy lose the selected fruit during harvesting, and the correct closing point is difficult to infer from pixels alone. This paper presents HarvestPoint-ACT, which makes both decisions explicit in perception and provides them to the policy. An instance segmentation front end with a keypoint branch predicts a mask and a harvest point for each visible fruit, where the harvest point specifies the location to close the gripper. A scheduler ranks detected candidates by occlusion and travel distance and selects one target. After each attempt, it redetects and reranks the candidates because the canopy may have changed. The selected fruit is encoded for an action chunking transformer as an eight-dimensional state, containing the absolute harvest point, the vector from the gripper to that point, a validity flag, and a confidence score. When the selected fruit is temporarily undetected, the system retains the last harvest point estimate in the robot base frame and marks it as stale, and aborts the attempt if the loss persists. On a canopy mock-up, HarvestPoint-ACT achieves a success rate of 88% , and of 75% under heavy occlusion. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Selective fruit harvesting is still one of the least automated operations in agriculture. The main bottleneck is perception– action coupling: the system needs to select fruit in cluttered, deformable, and self-occluding canopies and reach it without damaging the fruit [1]. Despite improvements in cycle time and success rate, field performance for many crops remains insufficient for commercial deployment, with occlusion and target ambiguity remaining major sources of failure [2]. Classical harvesting pipelines decompose the task into detection, 3-D localization, motion planning, and a ser-voed final approach [3]. Although this structure is inter-pretable, errors propagate across stages: planning inherits pose-estimation errors, and contact-induced branch deforma-tion is difficult to encode as a planning constraint. Imitation learning instead maps observations directly to actions [4], [5], avoiding explicit models of these interactions. ACT and  

> This work was supported by the Fujian Provincial Department of Educa-tion under Grant JAT241022 and by the Fujian Provincial Forestry Bureau under Grant 2026FKJ3.
> 1College of Computer and Information Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China.
> 2School of Mechatronic Engineering and Automation, Shanghai Univer-sity, Shanghai, China.
> 3Graduate School of Engineering Science, The University of Osaka, Osaka, Japan.
> ∗Hanying Hu and Weipeng Li contributed equally.
> †Corresponding author: Hao Chen,

chenhaox@outlook.com  

> Fig. 1. (a) The robot must determine which fruit to pick and where to grasp it during harvesting. (b) Overview of HarvestPoint-ACT.

related visuomotor policies have recently been explored for viewpoint planning, clustered strawberry picking, and open-field pepper harvesting [6]–[8]. However, applying ACT to harvesting introduces two chal-lenges: which fruit to approach and where to grasp it. First, similar-looking fruits make the target identity ambiguous. Occlusion, loss of the target from the wrist-camera view, or increased salience of a neighboring fruit may cause the policy to drift or stall [6], [9]. Second, selecting the correct fruit does not specify a valid grasp point. The grasp point is a task-specific affordance constrained by the peduncle, supporting branch, and gripper geometry [10]. It is therefore not equivalent to a generic image feature such as the mask centroid. ACT must otherwise learn this metric grasp point implicitly from demonstrations. Both challenges involve information that are already avail-able in the perception output. An instance segmentation front end supplies a per-fruit mask, a keypoint branch estimates the harvest point [11]. We therefore develop HarvestPoint-ACT, in which a scheduler selects the target fruit and an eight-dimensional harvest-point state conditions ACT on its metric grasp point. A persistence mechanism maintains this target through temporary detection failures. This design leads to two contributions:  

> •

Target-specific harvest point conditioning for ACT. 

We select one fruit from the detected instances and arXiv:2608.18446v1 [cs.RO] 19 Aug 2026 condition ACT on its grasp point through an eight-dimensional state. The state encodes its grasp point in the robot base frame and relative to the end effector, together with a validity flag and confidence score. This state explicitly tells the policy which fruit to grasp and where. The ACT backbone is unchanged apart from one input token.  

> •

An occlusion-aware closed-loop harvesting system. 

A scheduler ranks fruits by occlusion and travel cost and reranks them after each attempt. During temporary detection failures, a persistence rule holds the harvest point in the robot base frame and marks it as stale; persistent failures trigger rescheduling. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Robotic Fruit Harvesting 

Field studies and reviews identify occlusion, clustered fruit, and changes in canopy geometry as recurring causes of harvesting failure [2], [12]. Most systems use a modular pipeline: perception estimates a fruit pose or picking point, and a motion planner and visual servo controller execute the approach [3], [9]. We retain the perception front end but provide its estimated harvest point to a learned visuomotor policy as an explicit goal. This keeps the task geometry explicit while allowing the approach behavior to be learned from demonstrations. Picking order also affects cycle time and success rate [13]. A sequence planned from the initial detections can become outdated after a pick because nearby fruits may move or become visible. Our scheduler therefore selects one fruit based on occlusion and travel cost, then redetects and reranks the candidates after every attempt. 

B. Imitation Learning for Harvesting 

Behavior cloning learns visuomotor policies from tele-operated demonstrations [5], [14]. ACT [4] predicts short sequences of actions rather than one action at a time, improving temporal consistency during manipulation. In harvesting, imitation learning has been used for viewpoint planning, clustered strawberry picking, and open-field pepper harvesting [6]–[8]. Our focus is instead to specify which fruit to grasp and where, and to preserve that goal during temporary detection loss. We retain the ACT backbone and add the eight-dimensional harvest point state as one encoder token. 

C. Explicit Goal Conditioning for Manipulation 

Conditioning a policy on an explicit goal is common in goal-conditioned imitation and reinforcement learning [15], where the goal is usually a target image or a latent plan. Keypoint methods express manipulation goals more directly as semantically meaningful points. For example, kPAM [16] defines manipulation objectives with keypoint affordances. Object-centric methods such as VIOLA [14] instead condi-tion a policy on detected object regions, while visual grasp synthesis predicts explicit grasp poses [17]. HarvestPoint-ACT combines semantic and geometric tar-get information in one harvest point, which links ACT to the fruit selected by the scheduler. The state carries both the manipulation goal and the reliability of its estimate. 

D. Target Persistence Under Occlusion 

Video object segmentation uses appearance and temporal memory to maintain targets through occlusion [18], [19]. In dense clusters, however, neighboring fruits often look alike, so an incorrect visual match changes the policy’s target. We use a conservative matching rule based on mask overlap and 3-D distance. If no detection matches, the system keeps the last harvest point in the robot base frame and marks it as stale. A persistent miss triggers redetection and rescheduling. This strategy accepts a temporary loss of detection rather than risking a switch to the wrong fruit. III. M ETHOD 

A. Problem Formulation 

We consider a manipulator with an eye-in-hand RGB-D camera in front of a canopy that contains an unknown number of fruits. A harvesting episode consists of repeatedly selecting one fruit, approaching it, closing the gripper at a suitable point on the fruit body, and detaching it. We separate the problem into a task level and a motion level . At the task level, a scheduler observes the current scene, forms the set of harvestable candidates, and selects one of them. At the motion level, a visuomotor policy executes the approach and the grasp for the selected target. The policy receives the identity of the target as an input instead of having to guess it. At time t the policy receives the observation ot =(Irgb  

> t

, xt, et). It consists of an RGB image Irgb  

> t

∈

R3×480 ×640 , an end-effector state xt ∈ R7, and a harvest-point state et ∈ R8. The policy outputs a chunk of H future actions 

At = ( at, at+1 , . . . , at+H−1) ∈ RH×7, (1) with H = 100 . Each action 

aτ = [∆ x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆rx, ∆ry , ∆rz , g ]⊤ (2) is a relative end-effector displacement expressed in the base frame, with a target gripper opening g. The end-effector state xt = [ p⊤ 

> t

, r⊤ 

> t

, g t]⊤ contains the absolute end-effector position pt ∈ R3, its rotation vector rt ∈ R3, and the current gripper opening. 

B. Perception and Harvest-Point Extraction 

Each RGB-D frame (Irgb  

> t

, D t) is processed by a Mask R-CNN [11] 1 with an additional keypoint branch, fine-tuned on our own annotated harvesting dataset. 2 It produces a set of detections 

Dt = {(Mi, u i, c i)}Nt

> i=1

, (3)   

> 1Any instance segmentation model that also predicts keypoints could take its place; we do not compare detection architectures.
> 2The dataset is sampled from the RGB videos recorded during teleoper-ated demonstration collection. Each annotated frame carries instance masks and harvest points. Dataset size is reported in Section IV-A. Fig. 2. Overview of HarvestPoint-ACT. Instance segmentation yields a mask and a harvest point per fruit. A task-level scheduler selects the target. The target enters the policy as an eight-dimensional harvest-point state alongside the RGB frame and proprioception, and the transformer regresses a chunk of
> Hfuture end-effector displacements.

where Mi ∈ {0, 1}480 ×640 is an instance mask, ui the predicted harvest point in image coordinates, and ci ∈ [0 , 1] 

a confidence score. Detections with ci < c min are discarded to remove false positives on foliage and background clutter from the candidate set. The harvest point is the location at which the gripper should contact the fruit body. We do not use the mask centroid: it carries no information about the peduncle, and for a partially occluded fruit it is biased toward the visible side and can fall outside the graspable region. We therefore define the harvest point semantically and label it by hand. For every fruit instance in the training set, an annotator marks the point on the fruit body at which the gripper can close without interfering with the peduncle or with the supporting branch [10]. Fig. 3 compares manual annotations with the detector outputs on the same wrist views.  

> Fig. 3. Annotation versus detection on the same wrist-camera views. (a) A manually annotated mask and a harvest point. (b) Mask R-CNN predictions (masks, keypoints, and confidences).

Depth at a single pixel is not reliable in a canopy. Leaf pixels can enter the mask, and fruit edges can produce depth artifacts. We therefore check the predicted point against the median depth ˜zi inside the mask before back-projecting it. If the depth at ui is within a threshold τz of ˜zi, i.e. |Dt(ui) −

˜zi| ≤ τz , we set the pixel u⋆i = ui. Otherwise we search a local window W(ui) centered at ui,

u⋆i = arg max 

> u∈W (ui)∩Mi

h

λd EDT( u; Mi) − λz Dt(u) − ˜zi

i

,

(4) where EDT( ·; Mi) is the Euclidean distance transform of the mask, and λd, λ z > 0 weight the two terms. The first term keeps the corrected pixel away from the mask boundary, and therefore away from occlusion edges. The second term rejects pixels whose depth is inconsistent with the fruit body. If no pixel in the window satisfies the same threshold τz , the fruit is dropped from the candidate set. The retained pixel is back-projected with the camera intrinsics K and transformed from the camera frame C into the robot base frame B,

P C 

> i

= Dt(u⋆i ) K−1

u⋆i

1



,

P B

> i

1



= T BC (t)

P C

> i

1



,

(5) where T BC (t) = T BE (t)T EC composes the forward kinematics of the arm, which maps the end-effector frame E into B, with the hand–eye calibration. 

C. Task-Level Harvest Scheduling 

The candidate set Ct consists of the detections that survive the confidence and depth checks of Section III-B. The scheduler ranks them and selects one. 

1) Occlusion Index: The occlusion index ϕi is the fraction of a fruit’s mask boundary ∂M i that has an occluder beside it. The occluder set Ωi contains the pixels of the other masks 

Mj , j̸ = i, and the pixels outside Mi with Dt(u) < ˜zi − δ,which are the foliage and branches that pass in front of the fruit. Background pixels farther away than the fruit depth are excluded. The occlusion index is 

ϕi = ∂M i ∩ N r (Ω i)

∂M i

∈ [0 , 1] , (6) where Nr (·) dilates a set by r pixels. The intersection therefore collects the boundary pixels that lie within r pixels of an occluder, and ϕi is the fraction of the boundary occupied by occluders’ dilation. A fruit that hangs free has 

ϕi ≈ 0. A fruit whose outline is mostly bounded by leaves, or by neighboring fruits in front of it, has ϕi close to 1. Fig. 4 illustrates the occlusion index on typical canopy views. 

2) Priority Score: Candidates are ranked by 

J(i) = wo (1 − ϕi) − wd ˆdi, (7) where ˆdi is the travel distance from the current end-effector pose to the pre-grasp pose, normalized by the workspace diameter. The ordering is least-occluded-first, so outer fruits are removed before the fruits behind them. This raises the success probability of the current attempt and reduces the disturbance to the remaining fruits. Fig. 4. Occlusion index on wrist-camera views. For each fruit, the occlusion index ϕi in (6) measures the fraction of the mask boundary that is adjacent to near occluders (neighboring fruits or foliage). Low ϕi indicates a freer fruit that should be picked earlier. High ϕi indicates a deeply occulded fruit. 

3) Replanning After Every Pick: The scheduler selects 

i⋆ = arg max i∈C t J(i), executes one attempt, and then redetects and reranks from scratch. We do not compute a full harvesting sequence in advance because detaching a fruit releases the load on a branch and the fruits around it may move. Occlusion can also change, and hidden fruits can appear. 

D. Harvest-Point Conditioning 

Once a target i⋆ is selected, it is passed to the policy in task space, as an eight-dimensional harvest-point state 

et =  ˆPt − pt

| {z } 

> relative (3)

; ˆPt

|{z}  

> absolute (3)

; vt

|{z}  

> validity (1)

; ˆct

|{z}  

> confidence (1)

 ∈ R8,

(8) where ˆPt ∈ R3 is the current estimate of the harvest point in the base frame, vt ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether the estimate was refreshed by a detection at this time step, and ˆct is the associated detection confidence. The relative term is the vector from the gripper to the harvest point, expressed in the frame of the actions in (1). It points the direction the gripper needs to move. The absolute term describes where that harvesting point is in the workspace, which the relative vector alone does not say. The validity and confidence entries tell the policy how much to trust the estimate. Section III-F describes how the estimate is maintained when detection fails. The policy receives no mask. Since et already identifies the selected fruit, adding the target mask as a fourth image channel gives no further gain (Section IV), although masks are still used to compute the harvest point and ϕi.

E. Policy, Training, and Inference 

We use ACT [4] in the LeRobot implementation [20]. The only change is at the input. The harvest-point state et is pro-jected to its own encoder token, next to the token of the end-effector state xt. The policy is trained by behavior cloning on 

100 teleoperated demonstrations with the objective of ACT. At execution, the policy is queried at 12 Hz. It predicts a chunk of H actions (1) and executes only the first k = 50 

of them, then is queried again on a new observation. This receding-horizon execution limits open-loop drift without querying at every timestep. The predicted displacements are added to the current pose and the manipulator is commanded to that pose. Fig. 2 summarizes the data flow. 

F. Target Persistence and Graceful Degradation 

During an approach, the detector can lose the selected fruit because a leaf or a neighboring fruit can occlude it, or the target can leave the wrist camera’s field of view. The harvest-point state et must remain defined through these misses. We maintain it in three steps. 

1) Step 1: Match and Update: At each cycle we match a detection to the selected fruit if its mask overlaps the previous target mask and its 3-D point is close to ˆPt,

IoU  Mj , ˆM  > τ iou and P B 

> j

− ˆPt 2 < τ p. (9) where Mj and P B 

> j

belong to detection j of the current cycle, 

ˆM is the mask of the target in the previous cycle, τiou is an overlap threshold, and τp is a distance threshold. On a match we blend the new point into the estimate, ˆPt = (1 −α) ˆPt−1 +

αP B 

> j

with α ∈ (0 , 1) , and set vt = 1 .

2) Step 2: Hold the Estimate: When no detection satisfies (9), we do not search for the fruit in the image. Instead, we assume the fruit is barely moves during the few seconds of an approach. We keep ˆPt = ˆPt−1, and et therefore still points at the last known location. We set vt = 0 and decay the confidence, ˆct ← γˆct−1 with γ ∈ (0 , 1) , so the policy knows the estimate is old. 

3) Step 3: Abort and Reschedule: If the miss lasts more than Tmax cycles, we stop using the estimate. The arm retracts and redetects the fruits from scratch. The scheduler of Section III-C may select a different fruit. The failed attempt is dropped, and the episode continues. Algorithm 1 shows how these three steps interact with the scheduler. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

Fig. 5 shows the setup. All experiments use a custom-designed six-degree-of-freedom manipulator with an Intel RealSense D405 mounted on the wrist. Perception and the policy run on a workstation with an AMD Ryzen 7 9800X3D CPU, 48 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. The code is written in Python. Mask R-CNN uses PyTorch, and the policy is trained with LeRobot. The attached video shows HarvestPoint-ACT harvesting on the real robot .The scene is an artificial citrus tree in a laboratory. Artificial oranges hang from its branches, and a collection bin stands beside the robot base. Each orange is held by a magnet, so the force needed to pull a fruit off is the same for every fruit and every trial. We use oranges because their color contrasts strongly with the leaves, so segmentation is not the limiting factor and the comparison in Section IV-C reflects the policies rather than the detector. A crop whose peduncle must be cut would need a different end effector and a different harvest point. Demonstrations are collected by teleoperation, using a leader arm of the same design as the manipulator. A layout 

is one arrangement of the oranges on the tree, and we rehang Algorithm 1 Harvest loop with scheduling and persistence  

> 1:

while fruits remain and the time budget is not exceeded do  

> 2:

Ct ← DETECT (Irgb  

> t

, D t) ▷ (3)–(5)  

> 3:

if Ct = ∅ then  

> 4:

break  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

i⋆ ← arg max i∈C t J(i) ▷ (7)  

> 7:

ˆPt ← P B 

> i⋆

; ˆM ← Mi⋆ ; nlost ← 0 

> 8:

while the grasp is not completed do  

> 9:

Ct ← DETECT (Irgb  

> t

, D t) 

> 10:

if a detection j satisfies (9) then  

> 11:

ˆPt ← (1 − α) ˆPt + αP B 

> j
> 12:

vt ← 1; ˆct ← cj ; ˆM ← Mj ; nlost ← 0 ▷ Step 1  

> 13:

else  

> 14:

keep ˆPt; vt ← 0; ˆct ← γˆct 

> 15:

nlost ← nlost + 1 ▷ Step 2  

> 16:

if nlost > T max then  

> 17:

retract; break ▷ Step 3  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

form ot by (8)  

> 21:

ˆAt ← πθ (ot); execute the first 50 actions  

> 22:

end while  

> 23:

if the grasp was completed then  

> 24:

retract and release the fruit  

> 25:

end if  

> 26:

end while 

the fruits between layouts to vary occlusion and reach. We record 100 demonstrations, each covering one attempt on a single fruit. From the recorded RGB streams we annotate 

693 frames, and use them to fine-tune the Mask R-CNN front end.  

> Fig. 5. Experimental setup for robotic fruit harvesting. The setup consists of the custom-design ma-nipulator with an Intel RealSense D405 mounted on the wrist, an ar-tificial tree with artificial oranges, and a collection bin.

B. Evaluation Metric 

Every method is evaluated on the same 4 fruit layouts. On each layout the robot runs the loop of Algorithm 1 until the candidate set is empty. We report three metrics. 1) Success is the fraction of attempts in which the gripper closes on the body of the scheduled fruit, separates it from the branch, and releases it into the collection bin. A fruit that is knocked off the tree by contact instead of being grasped counts as a failure. Artificial fruit cannot be scored for bruising, so we do not report fruit damage. 2) Approach success is the fraction of attempts in which the gripper reaches the selected fruit. It separates a failure of the approach from a failure of the grasp close. 3) 

Cycle time is how long one attempt takes, from the start of                     

> TABLE I HARVESTING PERFORMANCE ON THE CANOPY MOCK -UP
> Success Approach Cycle time Method (%) Success (%) (s) ACT (RGB only) [4] 076 —ACT + masks 080 —Diffusion Policy [5] 080 —SmolVLA 084 —
> HarvestPoint-ACT 88 92 21.5

the detection to the release of the fruit. We average it over successful attempts only, so it is undefined for a method that never succeeds. Closing on a fruit other than the selected one counts as a failure for both success and approach success. 

C. Comparison With Baselines 

We compare HarvestPoint-ACT with four baselines: 1) ACT (RGB only) is the original formulation. It sees the RGB frame and xt and nothing else, so it has to infer from the image both which fruit to pick and where to close the gripper. 2) ACT + masks adds fruit masks as a fourth image channel. The policy then sees where the fruits are, but not which one to pick. It therefore tests whether marking every fruit is enough. 3) Diffusion Policy [5] keeps the same RGB observation and replaces the action decoder with a diffusion model. 4) SmolVLA [21] is a pretrained vision–language–action model, fine-tuned on the same demonstrations. Its language channel specifies the task semantically, but says nothing about where to close the gripper. All learned methods are trained on the same 100 demon-strations for the same number of gradient steps, and are queried at the same rate at execution. Every method is evaluated on the same 25 harvesting cases, which differ in the position of the fruit and in the surrounding clutter. One case is one attempt . The attempt ends when the fruit is released into the collection bin, or when the time budget of 10 s runs out. An attempt that reaches the fruit but does not detach it before that limit counts as a failure. In Table I, all four baselines reach vicinity of the fruit in most attempts, with approach success between 76% and 

84% . The approach motion is therefore learned from the demonstrations even without explicit conditioning. None of the four grasps a single fruit, and the failure is always the same: the gripper closes before the fingers touch the fruit. We attribute this to the absence of a distance cue. The baselines receive the wrist camera image and their own end-effector state, which says where the gripper is but not where the fruit is. Depth never reaches the policy, so no input gives the distance to the fruit. Fruit can also be partly occluded by a leaf or leave the camera view, so the image becomes ambiguous and small errors take the arm into views that the demonstrations never cover. The harvest-point state supplies that cue, and HarvestPoint-ACT reaches 

92% approach success and 88% grasp success on the same layouts. TABLE II OCCLUSION EXPERIMENT BY OCCLUSION INDEX ϕi

Occlusion level Success (%) Avg. (s) 

ϕi ∈ [0 , 0.25) 90 11.6 

ϕi ∈ [0 .25 , 0.50) 80 12.3 

ϕi ∈ [0 .50 , 0.75) 80 23.3 

ϕi ∈ [0 .75 , 1.00] 75 28.9 

Fig. 6. Representative failure cases during robotic fruit harvesting. (a) Leaf dragging caused by unintended interaction with surrounding foliage. (b) The fruit falls off due to contact during harvesting. 

D. Robustness to Occlusion 

Table II reports HarvestPoint-ACT under four occlusion levels defined by ϕi. Success rate decreases monotonically as occlusion increases, from 88 .5% for ϕi ∈ [0 , 0.25) to 76% 

for ϕi ∈ [0 .75 , 1] . The average pick time roughly doubles. The lightly occluded fruits are completed in about 12 –13 s ,whereas heavily occluded fruits take about 23 –29 s .These two trends indicates that dense occluders slow the approach rather than break it. The arm has to work around leaves, but the harvest point stays usable. This is consistent with the persistence rule of Section III-F: when an occluder removes the detection, ˆPt is still held and keeps pointing at the fruit. Overall, explicit harvest-point conditioning remains effective across occlusion levels. Even in the heaviest level, 

76% of fruits are still detached. 

E. Failure Modes 

Two representative failure cases observed during harvest-ing are shown in Fig. 6. First, the gripper catches a leaf on the way in and drags it. This damages the foliage and can bring the arm to a stop before it reaches the fruit. Second, contact knocks the fruit off its magnet before the fingers close, so the attempt ends without a grasp. Both cases come from contact with the canopy, which the policy does not model. We assume that the fruit barely moves while the arm approaches, and contact can violate this. We also do not model entanglement, where the gripper or the fruit catches on leaves and branches. Sensing such contact and recovering from it is left to future work. V. C ONCLUSION 

We presented HarvestPoint-ACT, a fruit harvesting policy that is told which fruit to pick and where to close the gripper, instead of having to infer both from pixels. Instance segmentation predicts a mask and a metric harvest point per fruit, a scheduler selects one target and replans after each attempt, and the target enters an action chunking transformer as an eight-dimensional state. Because the harvest point is held in the robot base frame, losing the detection during an approach does not end the attempt. On a canopy mock-up, HarvestPoint-ACT achieves a success rate of 88% , and of 

75% under the heaviest occlusion level. In the future, we will evaluate the system in an orchard, model contact during harvesting, and integrate a mobile base to reach fruits that a single viewpoint can neither see nor reach. REFERENCES 

[1] C. W. Bac, E. J. van Henten, J. Hemming, and Y. Edan, “Harvesting robots for high-value crops: State-of-the-art review and challenges ahead,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 888–911, 2014. [2] H. Zhou, X. Wang, W. Au, H. Kang, and C. Chen, “Intelligent robots for fruit harvesting: Recent developments and future challenges,” Precision Agriculture ,vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1856–1907, 2022. [3] H. Kang, H. Zhou, and C. Chen, “Visual perception and modeling for autonomous apple harvesting,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 62 151–62 163, 2020. [4] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware,” in Proc. Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [5] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” in Proc. Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [6] L. Li and H. Kasaei, “Enhanced view planning for robotic harvesting: Tackling occlusions with imitation learning,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. [7] Z. Fei, W. Lu, L. Hou, and C. Peng, “Learning to pick: A visuomotor policy for clustered strawberry picking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14530 , 2025. [8] C. H. Kim, A. Silwal, and G. Kantor, “Autonomous robotic pepper harvesting: Imitation learning in unstructured agricultural environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3406–3413, 2025. [9] R. Barth, J. Hemming, and E. J. van Henten, “Design of an eye-in-hand sensing and servo control framework for harvesting robotics in dense vegetation,” 

Biosystems Engineering , vol. 146, pp. 71–84, 2016. [10] I. Sa, C. Lehnert, A. English, C. McCool, F. Dayoub, B. Upcroft, and T. Perez, “Peduncle detection of sweet pepper for autonomous crop harvesting—combined color and 3-d information,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 765–772, 2017. [11] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Doll´ ar, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2017, pp. 2961–2969. [12] B. Arad, J. Balendonck, R. Barth, O. Ben-Shahar, Y. Edan, T. Hellstr¨ om, J. Hemming, P. Kurtser, O. Ringdahl, T. Tielen, and B. van Tuijl, “Development of a sweet pepper harvesting robot,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1027–1039, 2020. [13] P. Kurtser and Y. Edan, “Planning the sequence of tasks for harvesting robots,” 

Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 131, p. 103591, 2020. [14] Y. Zhu, A. Joshi, P. Stone, and Y. Zhu, “VIOLA: Object-centric imitation learning for vision-based robot manipulation,” in Proc. Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2022. [15] C. Lynch, M. Khansari, T. Xiao, V. Kumar, J. Tompson, S. Levine, and P. Sermanet, “Learning latent plans from play,” in Proc. Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2020. [16] L. Manuelli, W. Gao, P. Florence, and R. Tedrake, “kPAM: Keypoint affordances for category-level robotic manipulation,” in Proc. International Symposium on Robotics Research (ISRR) , 2019. [17] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, M. Gou, and C. Lu, “GraspNet-1Billion: A large-scale benchmark for general object grasping,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020, pp. 11 444–11 453. [18] H. K. Cheng and A. G. Schwing, “XMem: Long-term video object segmentation with an atkinson–shiffrin memory model,” in Proc. European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2022. [19] C. Doersch, Y. Yang, M. Vecerik, D. Gokay, A. Gupta, Y. Aytar, J. Carreira, and A. Zisserman, “TAPIR: Tracking any point with per-frame initialization and temporal refinement,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. [20] R. Cadene, S. Alibert, F. Capuano, M. Aractingi, A. Zouitine, P. Kooijmans, J. Choghari, M. Russi, C. Pascal, S. Palma, M. Shukor, J. Moss, A. Soare, D. Aubakirova, Q. Lhoest, Q. Gallou´ edec, and T. Wolf, “LeRobot: An open-source library for end-to-end robot learning,” in Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. [21] M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, F. Capuano, P. Kooijmans, S. Palma, A. Zouitine, M. Aractingi, C. Pascal, M. Russi, A. Marafioti, S. Alibert, M. Cord, T. Wolf, and R. Cadene, “SmolVLA: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844 , 2025.